From Hansel minutes.com. It's
Hanselman it's Oh, weekly discussion
with web developer and technologist
Scott Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 24 recorded Monday, July 10th, 2006.
Support for Hanselman is provided
by COVID Smith tools, makers
of code Smith and extensible
template based code generator for.net.
And now Hanselman its listeners.
Get $100 off COVID Smith
professional with coupon code H
M 100. online@covidsmithtools.com. Support is
also provided by exceeds zip
for.net, which lets you handle
zip tar and jesus' files
on FTP servers in streams
in memory and more. Now
get 20% off any exceed
component or suite just for
listening to Hansel minutes, just
go to  dot com
slash FPT and use the
code H M dash 20
dash 20. And don't forget
to visit Peter bloom.com. Start
with better controls finish with
better sites online@peterblum.com and.net developers
journal the world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott discusses advanced capabilities
of Microsoft PowerShell. Hi, this
is Carl Franklin. Welcome back to
Hansel minutes. Of course we're
talking with Scott Hanselman as
we always do Scott what's
on the roster for today.
Well, it's been awhile since
we talked about power shell,
which was originally called monad
or the Microsoft command shell.
Right. And I got a
number of letters from listeners
saying they want to hear
about some more PowerShell stuff.
And if you read my
blog, you know that I've
been messing around with a
lot of PowerShell. So let's
call this advanced PowerShell such
as it is. Okay, great.
Now, have you got a
chance to dig into this
at all? No, I've read
the blogs. I've seen what
it can do, but I
haven't done it myself. I
haven't used it yet. PowerShell
for me, I've been thinking
more and more about how
to describe this. You know,
what's the elevator speech. When
you try to explain to
someone what's PowerShell and it's,
you know, it's a.net command
line that lets you put
windows on a string, sweet,
anything that you can do,
you know, by right clicking
and MMC and saying file
new whatever, you know, you
can do with, with PowerShell.
And when you script it,
You can pass object references,
right? Exactly. You pass objects
from place to place. So,
you know, you can do
all the same stuff you're
used to like DIR pipe
more. But when you say
DIR, you're not really getting
a listing of directory, you're
not really listing out the
directory as text. You're getting
back some director info objects,
file info. You're really looking
at a range of objects,
which then lets you use
reflection, manipulate these things. So
it's a fantastic command shell
and there's a very vibrant
community. That's being built up
around this for systems administrators,
but also enthusiasts and developers
like like myself, I'm not
an admin or an it
guy, but you know, I
used to write a lot
of small programs to test
stuff out. You know, maybe
you want to check to
see what daytime dot two
string does or whatever. And
more and more I've been
doing that at the command
line. It's such an amazing
experience to be able to
load an assembly from your
command line and start calling
methods on it directly. That's
very cool. Now there's a
whole series of lists and
resources that I could potentially
give you and I'll give
you a lot, but there
is a fantastic list of
resources at delicious slash PowerShell,
which is at  dot
com slash G I L
delicious of course, as these
social bookmarking system online Automatic
cream rising to the top
machine. Okay, Exactly. And the
user whose username is PowerShell
has set up a series
of links. And then there
are also the, all of
the delicious links that are
tagged as PowerShell, which is
at shrinker slash G I
N. So that's delicious slash
PowerShell or delicious last tags.
That's PowerShell. Once you start
poking around in there and
you see the popular tags,
you see basically everything, the
depths of all of the
things that are being talked
about around PowerShell now, because
power show used to be
called monad or the Microsoft
command shell. A number of
things are tagged as M
S H cause mush was
what we used to call
PowerShell. So you might also
take a look at the
delicious things that are tagged
mush. So that's at shrink
stir slash G I R,
between the three of those
things. You've pretty much got
the full spectrum of what's
being talked about within the
PowerShell universe. Now there's another
number of other places where
you can get introductions and
things about PowerShell. And we
talked About including your show.
I mean, we did an
introductory show in PowerShell. Yeah.
And, and we won't redo
that show here. Well, so
we're going to think this
is advanced PowerShell. Yeah. Part
two. So might take a
look at that last show.
It was a nice, quick
update on what was going
on in PowerShell and kind
of the gestalt behind it.
But we're going to talk
about a little bit more
advanced stuff. So if you
want the basics, take a
look at our other show.
There's also a good site
at Rez kit, which is
at shrinks.com/g I V. I
can give you some details
on what's available, but things
that I'm interested in in
PowerShell are extending it right.
Making it Dance, right? So
there's, There's a thing called
a commandlet a CMD let
commandlet and commandlets can be
written in any dotnet language.
So you would sit down
and C sharp and you'd
make a new class library
and then take either existing
code that you have or
write stuff from scratch, using
the full power of the.net
framework and write out a
new command within power show.
These commands might take input
that's been piped in or
input from the command line.
It's totally up to you.
There's a really great screencast
at shrink stir slash G
I X. And this is
a video of how to
make a commandlet. There's lots
of great sample code that
comes with the documentation pack
for a PowerShell. And I
don't, I personally haven't had
to write a commandlet. I
kept saying to myself, well,
I'm going to really get
right into.net and do it,
but more and more, I'm
finding myself writing scripts because
you really have the full
power of the.net framework. You
don't have IntelliSense right out
of the bat on the,
on the command line, but.net
is sitting right there. You
can do anything that you
want to, but a lot
of people have existing libraries
that they want to call,
or they liked that the
sense of packaging up all
of their stuff into one
single commandlet. And so take
a look at that screencast.
Okay. Now, when you create
a command that you package
up your existing functionality or
new functionality into a DLL,
you can run a thing
called make shell, make hyphen
shell, and you can make
your own custom PowerShell With
reference. Are you stalking about
references with references loaded up
or right References, loaded up
environment, loaded up colors and
everything to customize. So you
might have, if you're an,
a system administrator for a
very large company, you might
want to have one for
managing exchange mailboxes and one
for managing FTP and have
all of your different shells
set up. I say, you
might want to set up
a custom one just for
the work that you do
with plop on, you know,
you might have BitTorrent things
from the command line. You
might have FTP stuff, set
up environment, variables, paths, existing
scripts prepared. So then you'd
have multiple shells, right? You
have, you have two shells
now You right. You've got
your ride command at the
ECC. We've got VAs VARs,
right? When you go into
visual Studio, cause it has
different path statements in the
environment. Sure, exactly. Yeah. So
extending that. How many different
kinds of context windows would
would one need? So we
have a big application at
my company called Voyager that
does online finance. Why wouldn't
we have a Karelian specific
PowerShell? And then we can
just ship that shell to
folks. They put PowerShell on
their system, they get kirlian.voyager.shell
and everything that they need.
Is there Hail to them,
Definitely some power there within
creating your own commandlet and
then creating your own. That's
pretty cool. I gotta tell
ya. Yeah, It's it gets
even cooler. So you can
get lots and lots of
good information at the Microsoft
PowerShell. Newsgroup this is just
at Microsoft slash communities up
at shrink stir slash GI
Y but the thing here's
the mind blowing thing. It's
not just about the shell.
It's about the engine. The
fact that it decided to
display itself as a text
on a black background, really
just facia on top of
this underlying engine. What if
I have an application that
I want to enable for
scripting? I've got an application,
it's got an object model.
It's got things that people
might want to extend. I
would like them to write
just a little bit of
script to manipulate the objects
that are living inside of
my application. Sure. So Lee
Holmes has got a really
great blog post that shrinks
your slash GIZ. And do
you remember logo? Did you
do this in school? Yeah.
The little turtle turtle, basic
kind of stuff. Yeah. Right.
Turn left. And then you
start learning about looping and
the next thing you know,
you've written a, in drawn
a flower, right? Some kind
of a recursive algorithm. Right.
So he wrote logo in,
in, in C sharp and
it's pretty straightforward. It's just
a little wind forms application.
He's got a little object
called turtle. Okay. And turtles
got a number of public
methods on it, like reset,
turn, left, turn. Right. And
things like that. It seems
pretty straight forward, but how
would he make it available
to the user to script?
So he makes a text
box where people can write
in PowerShell script and then
he hosts what's called a
run space. That run space
is the PowerShell engine. Okay.
So at this point, PowerShell
hasn't yet come together. It
hasn't come into the application.
He's got a nice graphical
area to draw the turtle.
He's got a text box.
They write into the text
box. Maybe they say turtle
dot left 10. Okay. Then
in the run button on
his click, he say, click
do it. He makes a
new run space. And then
he says to the run
space, there's this object called
turtle. And he hands it
into it. So you're creating
an instance of PowerShell that
run space, handing the turtle
object into it. And then
you say, create pipeline. Cause
a pipeline is really a
series of commands. So whatever
they wrote in their textbooks,
that script is a pipeline
of command after command, after
command. Cool. And then he
says pipeline dot, invoke, and
draws what the turtle did.
Very cool. Think of how
you could use this in
existing applications. Sure. You know,
maybe someone could script plop
catcher to do different things.
You've basically built in automation.
You like using swamp catchers,
you like using pop catchers
and example I've noticed, Well,
in this case, my audience
of one is you. Right.
So I'm putting it in
terms of my audience can
understand just like my examples
always Voyager and our application
at Kirlian. Yeah. But pop
catcher is a great example
because it's one of these
little applications that started to
become more and more fully
featured. Sure. And at some
point scripting might be something
you might want to do
to it. Absolutely. Or other
applications. Yeah. Scripting is one
of those things that one
has always wants to add
to their application, but it,
the, the, the, the distance
between your idea and the
actual getting it done is
always so great. In this
example, Lee Holmes has added
scripting to an application in
six lines of code and
you don't see the PowerShell,
right. It doesn't fire up
and show off into something.
I mean, this is running
in process. He's just adding
a reference to system.management dot.
So think about this. If
you can start hosting the
power show, just in this
example of doing script, what
else could you do with
it? You could have an
administrative console written entirely in
PowerShell, get it working and
then write a WinForms app
around it, a management application.
You know, I hear the
voice of skepticism in the
back of my head. Maybe
the few listeners out there
are feeling this too. You
know, why are you, why
are you reinventing the wheel?
Why not just do things
with visual studio? Why not
just create an application? You
know, why, why have a
limited set of functionality when
you can have the real
thing? Okay. So that's a
very good question. So one,
if I wanted to go
and write some functionality that
would be available to me
at both the command line
and at the wind forms
in wind forms, I'd have
to write some DLL out
there that would do the
thing, right? So I'd write
that and see sharper VB.
And then I'd write the
command line version, right? And
then I'd write the windows
version. But because the command
line version is forced to
take strings as input and
strings it out as output,
it wouldn't be able to
very easily communicate with other
pieces of the command line
version. I couldn't string multiple
commands. Now you have to
write parsers and things like
that. Then, then think it
grows. Okay. Interoperability is really
the Key here, right? Interrupt
between commands between. But it
really gets interesting when we
talk about calm and WMI.
If we're talking just.net, you
partially have a point. Yeah.
You could just read it
and.net and it would work
fine. And many people have
done just that. And that's
great, but what's cool in
PowerShell is that WMI objects
and comm objects and dotnet
objects are all peers. And
now in.net and a regular
WinForms application, calm objects have
that whole interrupt thing, getting
fed behind you. And every
once in a while, a
little calm leaks out and
you go, eh, that's nasty
and WMI. Isn't exactly easy
either, But you have the
same. You must have the
same interrupt issues with calm
objects in PowerShell that you
do in a.net app, don't
you? Well. So, because PowerShell
is doing all of its
evaluation at runtime and laser
only, they get to generate
all this stuff. And the
whole facia on top of
your objects at runtime and
the object back that they
hand back to you, they
can make it look like
anything that they want. So
in PowerShell, if you want
to make a new.net object,
you can say new hyphen
object system dot string. If
you wanna make a new
comm object, you say new
hyphen object, dashcam shell dot
application, and then you can
loop over it and look
at collections and run around
inside the object. Exactly. As
if it's any old power.
Sure. But one of the
problems, especially with, you know,
the disposed pattern and all
that kind of stuff with
calm objects is that if
you really want to get
rid of them, you, you
can't just set them to
nothing. You have to, you
know, use the Marshall object
and release comm object. I
personally, I, I'm not sure
how specifically PowerShell deals with
that, but I've gone and
just set the common objects
to nil, to NOLA rather
to dollar sign. No, and
haven't had any trouble, we've
treated WMI objects the same
way. I really mean that
it's working right though. But
yeah, No, it doesn't mean
it's working. Right. But it
does mean that PowerShell does
everything that it possibly can.
And your point is valid
to the extent that it's
possible to make it look
like all these objects are
peers are the same thing.
And I guess it's also
what you're using it for.
Right. You're using PowerShell to
script applications together. Whereas, you
know, the problems with comm
inter-op really happen, you know,
really rear their ugly head
under a big scalable backend
system. Sure. That's a very
valid point and I'm not
going to necessarily have PowerShell
doing 10,000 some things against
a com interface. Although I
did, I did recently write
a script that would talk
to outlook and remove duplicates
from my calendar. So it
spun through all my calendar
objects within the outlook object
model, using calm, then look
for duplicates and remove them.
And I did that. It
took like 200 megs of
Ram and pounded on outlook
for half an hour. But
it didn't, it didn't blow
up. It didn't leak that
I could see. Right. So
in it and a leak
is no problem. Cause it
doesn't have to stay in
memory for long periods of
time. It's just going to
run into that shell process
blows away. It's gone anyway.
Exactly. Yeah, exactly. Okay. Good
points. Yeah. So I'm one
of the things that we've
been doing at Carilion is
a scripting, our version control
using subversion. We've talked about
before, how I'm a subversion
guy and we've got some
applications that need to programmatically
check things in and out
of the system, we're doing
some configuration management. We have
an application that if our
end user goes into our
system and makes a change
using a configuration tool, we
want to know that they
made that change and we
want to have auditability. So
we actually check the files
that that person changes with
our content management system back
into source control. So then
we can go back and
say, well gosh, on Tuesday,
the client logged in and
made three changes and I
can see exactly what he
did by doing DIFs. It's
a pretty, pretty simple pattern,
has nothing to do with
source control has to do
with managing content, right? Why
create a database to do
all that management when you've
got a perfectly good journaled
file system right here. And
the same thing would apply
to team foundation server. But
the, the subversion system is
this big opaque sea monster
that, that I don't well
understand, but a really cool
guy named Arnold fines at
shrink stir slash GIK. This
is the guy who wrote
ONC. ONC is the subversion
plugin for visual studio is
also a PowerShell fan and
is helping us write subversion
scripts to check stuff in
and out. So right now
there are scripts that living
at the command line, but
we're going to plug those
in using that same extension
ability to host PowerShell within
a web application or WinForms
application. So all that functionality
to make these changes to
our configuration system are gonna
be available in a wind
farms app. We might put
an into an like an
office application like InfoPath or
the command line or in
on the web, all being
hosted within PowerShell. So PowerShell
helps you level the playing
field with these admin administrative
consoles that you might have
very cool. So that administration
stuff is really where it's
at. If you take a
look at Jeffrey , the
architect of PowerShell had a
series of tech ed talks
that are now online. You
can see him at shrink
cutter slash G I M.
Jeffrey is the really enthusiastic
guy who, who helped create
PowerShell. He's kind of the
architect of PowerShell, the father
of PowerShell. I got a
chance to meet him at
tech ed. We were just
literally there on Sunday, walking
around the preconference had started.
And he was hanging out
talking to another blogger named
Mark from the Netherlands. And
they were just hanging out
and I was like, Hey,
what are you guys up
to? And then we just
start hacking on PowerShell. I
think I talked to him
for like three hours, such
a cool guy. That's one
of the great things about
tech and you just bump
into people. I ended up
doing two, two demonstrations of
PowerShell for Jeffrey, and so
he could free him up
to do a little bit
of other things. So we
were writing more and more
PowerShell content at Kirlian. We
need to, we need a
unit test that content. So
one of our guys, Jason Sherman
at Karelian has written an
end unit example up a
trickster slash Gio, where you
can use an unit to
test your PowerShell scripts, to
see if they work well.
Cool. Very, very simple, same
exact model as the logo
stuff you're hosting PowerShell within
end unit, and then end
unit itself gets hosted within
a test runner. And those
concepts very much apply to
whatever test runner you're using.
If you're using a team
foundation server, it would apply
as well. It's just that
flexible having an in-process engine
to fire up PowerShell. It
makes it really, really powerful.
Nice. Now, one of the
other things that PowerShell is
really awesome at doing is
manipulating XML. It lets you
look at XML in what
feels like a very strongly
typed way. Like if I
were going to load up,
if I were gonna open
up an RSS feed and
look for attachments, right? Look
for enclosures. Typically I would
like do what XML document
that load, give it the
Earl. Then I'd say like
select nodes or select single
nodes near codex use X
path to write use X
path type in whack, whack
slash enclosures or something like
that. I could use get
elements by tag name and
get all of the elements
of certain tag name, Several
nested loops. Yeah. I could
spend through it looking at
the different child nodes underneath
that, that Dom with PowerShell
though, you can do all
those things of course, but
it also looks at the
tags and generates basically I
would say synthetic properties. So
I could say taking a
variable, a let's say, Hey,
and I go and I
go off and I get
my RSS feed. And now
inside of the variable a
is my RSS feed. I
could say a.rss.channel dot items
and spin through that list.
So they don't really exist,
but it looks at the
document and it gleans them
right there. There's synthetic, that's
a beautiful model. Oh, it's
so clean. It's not serialization.
Right. It's almost like link
or X link. Yeah. But
it's today. Very cool. Yeah.
And then I can hear
with what's cool. Check this
out. So I can say
a.rss.channel that items pipe, and
I can pipe that collection
of items. And then I
can go and say where
item dot title equals this.
So I can almost kind
of, it's very linked, like,
and it all happens today
and it's all because PowerShell
is doing this lazy reflection.
You loose type redness interpreting,
and it's very fast, you
know, performance isn't, doesn't have
to be an issue. Right.
Cause it's supposed to be
friendly and flexible. Yeah. And
performance isn't less and less
of an issue every year
with these new processors. It's
ridiculous. Yeah. Yeah. Especially for
apps. Exactly. Exactly. And for
administration, it's not that big
of a deal, but it
still is pretty fast. So
I went and I noticed
that a guy had written
a windows, desktop search thing,
plugin commandlet for PowerShell because
he want to be able
to search his desktop search
from, from PowerShell. Now I
stopped using windows, desktop search
a while back. I use
Google desktop search. So I
know that Google desktop has
a calm API. So I
figured I'd go off and
try to do some magic
to talk to that calm
API. But yeah, the calm
part of my brain has
long been overwritten by more
interesting things. Right. That that
brain cell now holds, I
don't know information about lost
Grey's anatomy. So I was
fizzy man. Oh yeah. I
gave up on all that
stuff. And then I said
to myself, well crap, how
am I going to talk
to Google desktop? All they
have is this calm API.
Well, turns out that, you
know, if you search Google
desktop, you're doing a local
host. They have a little
mini web server, right. You're
on like port 80, 80,
if you type in format
equals XML on the Earl,
when you talk to your
Google desktop, they'll hand back
XML rather than, Oh, and
you could pipe that right
into S into PowerShell PowerShell.
Wow. So what I ended
up doing was I did
a local web server call
basically. I said to PowerShell
search for Carl Franklin does a
web service call to the
local host instance of Google
desktop format equals XML and
then spun through it. And
then here's the cool part.
It returns back the file
names, right? Yeah. Well, those
file names are local. They're
on my real system. So
I can go and say,
get info and suddenly talk
to those file names. And
I ended up returning not
just a list of the
file names, but the actual
file and Philip see your
headings. Exactly. And then from
there, I could say search
for all of these files
and get their content and
copy them here or delete
them or whatever. So, you
know what I ended up
doing, I ended up searching
for my social security number,
found it in a tax
that I had forgotten about
and then pipe the resulting
file info optics and deleted
them. Wow. Yeah. Very cool
stuff. And that's just one
example that applies to whatever
you want to do, any
place where you've got some
information and you want to
tie it into other information.
So PowerShell is that spackle,
right? It's that putty that
can tie these disparate bits
of information together. So for
automating like the, the workflow
process, I know that you
have a very complicated workflow
process to make plop work
because you have the source
audio and then it fires
off all of these different
codecs and compressors and things
to make all the different
audio. And then FTP them
put things in databases and
stuff, power it's probably batch
files and magic and vb.net.
I don't know how you
do it. It is no,
it's no batch files. It's
shelling out to different things
and shelling out to convert
the files, you know, to
lame and to the windows,
media encoder. And, you know,
the workflow is all just
logic. It's all AB network
Stuff like stuff like that
is totally something you could
write in vb.net. And you
already have the benefits of
writing it in scripting are
the, you know, the flexibility
that you can change those
things very quickly. There's also
the notion of a progress
bar within PowerShell. You can
say, right progress. And depending
on, depending on what it's
hosted in, it might be
hosted in the command line
and then bring up kind
of an ANSI art progress
bar. Or if it's hosted
in a windows application, you
might choose to put up
an actual progress bar. So
no one has to know
it's a PowerShell script and
you still get the flexibility
of being able to change
those scripts. That examples it's
shrink, stir.com/gi Q very nice.
Yeah, pretty cool stuff. There's
a number of different advanced
things that I've got up
on the blog to take
a look at. One of
them is a talking to
virtual server, 2005, using WMI
with shrink.com/gis, and then extending
DIR actually making Durer DIR
show more information than it
does when it ships with
the PowerShell. That's at
dot com slash Git nice
lots of good information. I
really encourage people to take
the time because it'll suck
for the first couple of
hours. PowerShell is a tos
and confusing, but once you
get it, it stops being
a tos and starts being
elegant. You know, it stops
being confusing and starts working
the way your brain works.
It really opens up a
lot of OSTP things that
aren't available to you. I
gotta tell you, Scott, that
example with Google desktop is
just wild. Cause how, how
would you have done that
before, right? Yeah. No, you
couldn't. Yeah. It would have
been very, very difficult. You
could have done it with
a command line application and.net,
but it wouldn't truly have
been integrated. It's the difference
between kind of MacGyver style
integration, right? Where you're, where
you're doing bailing wire and
inter-op tweezers and really having
it. Wow. That sounds fantastic.
Scott. I think the listeners
are really going to appreciate
all your hard work and
for rounding up all these
great resources, check out PowerShell,
get into it, and we'll
see you next week on.